                                                 Official (Closed), Non-Sensitive

ST1504 DEEP LEARNING ASSIGNMENT 2

Images from https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/cifar.html

School Name  School of Computing
Semester     AY2026/27 Semester 1
Course Name  DAAA
Module Code  ST1504
Module Name  Deep Learning

                                                         Page 1 of 9
                                                 Official (Closed), Non-Sensitive

ST1504 DEEP LEARNING ASSIGNMENT 2

Assignment 2 (CA2: 40%)

The objective of the assignment is to help you gain a better understanding of
applying Generative Deep Learning and Reinforcement Learning (RL).

There are three parts in this assignment, Parts A, B, C.

Guidelines

1. You are to work in groups of two for Parts A and B. For Part C, this is an
         individual task.

2. In this assignment, you will:

             A. Create GAN/VAE for image generation and evaluate the performance
                  of the network.

             B. Create RL to solve the task at hand.
             C. Carry out some literature research and prepare a technical paper on

                  CNN, RNN, GAN/VAE or RL. (Just ONE topic.)

3. For Parts A and B, you should prepare the following:

        a) Jupyter notebook including your code, comments and visualisations
             (.ipynb).

        b) In addition, please save a copy of the Jupyter notebook as a .html file.
        c) Include your best neural network weights (.h5 file).
        d) A deck of presentation slides (.pptx file) for your project.
        e) A statement indicating the contributions by each member of the group,

             including percentage of workload for specific contributions.

             NOTE: Each student must be well-versed with both Parts A and B. Whilst
             you can consider splitting the workload, you will still be evaluated on
             everything in this CA. You cannot expect to only do one part but know little
             or nothing about the other part.

4. For Part C, you should submit your file as a Word (.docx) or .pdf document. If
         you write your own codes, you must include them.

5. Submit all materials in a zipped file. Each student must submit his/her own
         complete set of files, even if you are sharing for Parts A and B.

         Any missing files (like missing .h5 file for best weights, missing .html
         file for your code, etc.) would incur marks deduction.

6. The normal SP's academic policies on Copyright and Plagiarism applies.
         Please note that you are to cite all sources. You may refer to the citation
         guide available at: https://sp-sg.libguides.com/citation

                                                  Page 2 of 9
                                                 Official (Closed), Non-Sensitive

ST1504 DEEP LEARNING ASSIGNMENT 2

7. You need to submit your declaration of academic integrity. You may access
         this document on Brightspace. Without this, your submission is deemed
         incomplete.

Submission Details

Deadline: 11 Aug 2026, 08:00 AM
Submit through: Brightspace

Late Submission

50% of the marks will be deducted for assignments that are received within ONE (1)
calendar day after the submission deadline. No marks will be given thereafter.
Exceptions to this policy will be given to students with valid LOA on medical or
compassionate grounds. Students in such cases will need to inform the lecturer as
soon as reasonably possible. Students are not to assume on their own that their
deadline has been extended.

Neural network models

You must build your own neural network models, with explanations and justifications.
Your neural network models can be improved upon with tweaks to your
architectures.
If you wish to implement transfer learning, it is only acceptable after you have done
the above (building your own models with justifications).
Otherwise, transfer learning is rejected.
Save the best weights of your neural networks. This is important for reproducibility
without having to re-train over some extended duration.

Reminder: Please check that all files are valid, especially
after zipping. If files cannot be opened, it would be
considered as no submission. It is your responsibility as
students to ensure this is properly carried out.

Learning outcomes

    1) Create generative deep learning for creative artificial intelligence.
    2) Create deep reinforcement learning for agents solving some desired tasks.
    3) Explain advanced deep neural network architectures within the context of

         image classification, natural language processing, generative deep learning,
         and reinforcement learning.

                                                  Page 3 of 9
                                                 Official (Closed), Non-Sensitive

ST1504 DEEP LEARNING ASSIGNMENT 2

PART A: GAN/VAE (45 marks)

Task

Apply some suitable GAN/VAE architectures to the problem of image generation. You
can use either GAN or VAE, or both. Use the given dataset for CIFAR10 to create
1000 small images. There should be 10 classes of images for you to generate. You
must submit your generated images (otherwise, there would be marks deduction).
You should implement some ways to evaluate the quality of your images:
A simple "by-eye" or "eye-power" method is to just generate say 100 images, and count
manually how many are acceptable images (not perfect, but display some plausible features of
the images --- perhaps as "clear", "marginal", "nonsense"). Alternatively, you can consider
other metrics/indicators. (Optional metrics: Fréchet Inception Distance, Inception Score.)
If you are asked to generate images of a specific class, propose a way of doing it.
If you are asked to generate black-and-white images instead of coloured ones, do you
think it would be easier or harder to produce better quality results?
What class(es) is/are relatively easier/harder to generate? Why?
Note: Do not worry too much about generating "perfect-looking images". Whilst quality
of images would represent the quality of your model, the more important aspects are
the process, your workflow and planning, your EDA, evaluation analysis, etc., as a
whole.
As this is a pair-work, you should discuss and optimise the GAN/VAE training between
yourselves, making use of available computing resources for both of you.

Dataset

Use the CIFAR10 dataset:
                                   tf.keras.datasets.cifar10.load_data()

You cannot use any external data to train your model.
Nevertheless, you are allowed to apply augmentation on the provided data, if you wish.
If you choose to do so, you must concretely explain why you make such a choice, as
well as investigate whether it is actually beneficial.

                                                  Page 4 of 9
                                                 Official (Closed), Non-Sensitive

ST1504 DEEP LEARNING ASSIGNMENT 2

Submission requirements for Part A

    1. Submit a zip file containing all the project files (source code, Jupyter
             notebook .ipynb file, .html file, and best neural network weights .h5, slides,
             1000 generated images).

    2. Submit a .docx file containing the list of specific contributions by each team
             member in the deliverables for Part A.

    3. Submit online via the Assignment link.

Evaluation criteria:

Component                Description                                          Marks

                         Provide background of the problem. Explain the

Background research, approach(es) being taken to solve the problem.           9

feature engineering      Some feature engineering on the provided dataset

                         may be carried out (if desirable).

Application of GAN/VAE,  Describe the GAN/VAE framework(s) being used in      9
       explanation of    this problem. Explain clearly why such GAN/VAE
      architecture(s)    framework(s) can be used and how it can solve
                         this problem.

Evaluation and           Evaluate the performance of the GAN/VAE model

improvements of GAN/VAE in this problem. Improve the GAN/VAE model            9

performance              performance systematically.

                         Give a good, clear presentation strictly within the

Presentation/Demo        allocated time. Quality of presentation slides       9
                         should be engaging and effectively helps with

                         communicating the key points.

                         Jupyter notebook should be well-documented with

Quality of report (Jupyter) comments and markdowns to explain the codes. It   9

                         should also be well-organised.

Note: You are building deep neural networks, which are remarkable things that in this case,
produce creative outputs. Think about how long it took top tech companies to train state-of-
the-art models, like ChatGPT, Co-Pilot, DeepSeek, etc., with massive computing power. In this
exercise, you have the opportunity to build your very own such generative AI models.

Yes, it will take time to train, but do enjoy the process and your results. Make use of the time
in the lab to train your models. Do not worry too much about final results, as the more
important thing is your workflow on building the models.

                         Page 5 of 9
                                                 Official (Closed), Non-Sensitive

ST1504 DEEP LEARNING ASSIGNMENT 2

PART B: REINFORCEMENT LEARNING (45 marks)

Task

Apply a suitable modification of deep Q-network (DQN) architecture to the problem.
Your model should exert some appropriate torque on the pendulum to balance it.

You must use DQN and satisfactorily demonstrate its viability.

(Note: The action space here is continuous. Hence, you should consider discretising
it in order to apply DQN.)

Here are several setups that you must investigate (set different values of  when
creating the "env" for the pendulum):

    1) The default strength for gravity, no need to change .
    2) Free-fall,  = 0.
    3) Anti-gravity,  = -10.
    4) Supergravity,  = 15.

In your work, you should plan clearly what you are doing, your approaches, and how
you systematically optimise your solutions.

For example, what hyperparameters can you tune? Is one trial enough or should you
repeat the trials? Why?

How do you conclusively demonstrate your so-called "best setup" to be the best? Are
you considering fastest learning, most stable learning, or some other criteria that you
choose to define?

Optional: You may consider other reinforcement learning architectures, if you wish,
but only after successfully implementing DQN. Otherwise, any other non-DQN
architecture will be rejected.

Dataset

Please use the following environment from OpenAI Gym.
https://www.gymlibrary.dev/environments/classic_control/pendulum/

NOTE: Stay within the older version of gym 0.17.3, as implemented in the lab for cartpole.

Submission requirements for Part B

    1. Submit a zip file containing all the project files (source code, Jupyter
             notebook .ipynb file, .html file, and best neural network weights .h5, slides).

    2. Submit a .docx file containing the list of specific contributions by each team
             member in the deliverables for Part B.

    3. Submit online via the Assignment link.

                                                  Page 6 of 9
                                                 Official (Closed), Non-Sensitive

ST1504 DEEP LEARNING ASSIGNMENT 2

Evaluation criteria:

Component             Description                                                  Marks

Background research,  Provide background of the problem. Explain the               9
    explanations of   approach(es) being taken to solve the problem.

 approach(es) taken

Application of RL with Describe the RL framework being used in this

appropriate rationale and problem. Explain clearly why this RL framework           9

explanations          can be used and how it can solve this problem.

    Evaluation and    Evaluate the performance of the RL agent in this             9
improvements of RL    problem. Improve the RL agent's performance
                      systematically.

                      Give a good, clear presentation strictly within the

Presentation/Demo     allocated time. Quality of presentation slides               9
                      should be engaging and effectively helps with

                      communicating the key points.

                      Jupyter notebook should be well-documented with

Quality of report (Jupyter) comments and markdowns to explain the codes. It        9

                      should also be well-organised.

                      Page 7 of 9
                                                 Official (Closed), Non-Sensitive

ST1504 DEEP LEARNING ASSIGNMENT 2

PART C: Technical Paper (10 marks)

This part of the assignment is to be completed individually. This is a challenge task for
students who wish to attempt it for higher marks.

Write a technical paper in single column format on any ONE of the following topics:

 CNN (computer vision, in general)
 RNN (natural language processing, in general)
 GAN, VAE (generative AI, in general)
 RL (reinforcement learning, in general)

In our lessons, we covered some fundamental and basic architectures for these
topics. However, there are certainly more advanced models available beyond what
we covered. Take this opportunity to dive deeper into such extensions.

Here are some examples (but you are free to do other topics not listed here):

There is a raft of advanced CNN models: ResNet, Inception, VGG. Consider focusing on one
such interesting models to you, and explore deeper.

For RNN, you may delve into how ChatGPT works, the underlying architecture, large
language models, for example.

For GAN, there are various other improvements apart from the basic DCGAN. Even VAE has
extensions to areas like physics.

For RL, we only covered DQN. How can we improve DQN? Double DQN, duelling, priority
sampling, etc. How about other RL architectures beyond DQN?

The paper should have the following components:

    1. Abstract
    2. Introduction
    3. Related Works
    4. Dataset/Methodology/Experiment
    5. Discussion
    6. Conclusions
    7. References

Submit the paper in Word or PDF format (page limit of 10 pages). If you write your
own codes, you must submit them to support your work.

NOTE: Do not just copy some advanced research paper without some proper
understanding. It does not need to be too technical/mathematical.

It is more meaningful to relate the advance topics you are exploring to
something we dealt with in class and in CA1/CA2. Demonstrate how it
improves upon those basic architectures that we covered.

                                                  Page 8 of 9
                                                 Official (Closed), Non-Sensitive

ST1504 DEEP LEARNING ASSIGNMENT 2

Do not provide a superficial review or "name-dropping" of advanced terms
without deeper understanding.
Evaluation criteria (total 10 marks):

Component                                Description

                                        Provide reviews of relevant research articles used in
                                        relation to your technical paper. Citations of those
Review of research articles research articles must be properly included.

                                        Note: The reviews must be relevant and meaningful.

Dataset                     Introduce the dataset to be used. Carry out relevant
                            preprocessing in preparation for model building.

            Models          Build an original/advance model, with some interesting
Elaboration, evaluation of  results. Include submission of Jupyter notebook.

   models, discussions      Demonstrate efficacy of model results in relation to the
                            topic being discussed. Relate with the research articles
Appropriate level of topic  that are reviewed earlier.

                            The topic should be slightly beyond what is covered in
                            class. However, it should be relatable to the fundamental
                            topics covered in class. Explain how this topic relates
                            and advances the fundamental topics covered in class.

                            The topics should not be overly technical with "name-
                            dropping" of advanced terms that does not demonstrate
                            deeper understanding.

Note: These are the five key evaluation criteria for Part C. The overall coherence of the
technical paper will add up to a total of 10 marks, based on these five criteria.

                            -- End of Assignment --

                            Page 9 of 9
